Page 1:
CAP 4630: Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
Assignment 1: Practical Application of Classical AI Techniques
This is a LIVE Document.
The purpose of this assignment is to demonstrate your understanding of Classical AI techniques by applying one or more of them to solve an illustrative problem.You will design a problem scenario and apply one or more
classical AI approaches discussed in class.
⚠ This is just Assignment 1, not the Final Project. No need to overwork or overthink.
⚠ The goal is to test your understanding of the techniques, not the complexity of the final solution.
CAP4630 - Assignment 1 - {Your_Name }
CAP4630 - REPO Project Ideas
What do you need to do?
1. MAKE A COPY of the ‘Assignment Template’ (link above) and save with {Your_Name}
2. Define a Problem Scenario (instructions below)
3. Describe your Solution:
a. Document your solution in the assignment document
b. (eventually) Add Link to Google Collab with your experimental code
4. Complete the assignment template with:
a. When applicable, Link to the Google Collab.
Page 2:
b. Problem Scenario
c. List of Classical AI techniques being applied
d. Self-Assessments
e. Full Instructions about your solution
5. Export the completed Assignment Document as a PDF and submit it to Canvas
Rules of Engagement
● Individual projects.
● You can bring your own scenario.
● We are providing a list of ideas and desirable scenarios as suggestions (link above).
● You will not be graded on the scenario itself, but aim to make it useful and engaging.
● Free to use any GenAI technology – apply any GenAI tool, architecture, or strategy necessary for the project. DO NOT use GenAI as a copy&paste tool to generate the project for you or excessive use in content
generation.
● Free to use any Text Editing technology – apply any Text Editing technology for the Research Paper (Google, Word, other), as long as (1) you keep the same structure as the template; and (2) you are able to
generate the PDF for submission.
● Template Compliance: The structure of the Research Paper must follow the sequence of Sections proposed in the Template. Deviations, such as removal of sections, reordering of content, or major alterations of
layout and formatting, will affect grading.
● Page Limit: no limit..
About the ‘Solution’
● The description must detail how you have applied one or more Classical AI techniques to solve the problem.
● In case you decide for no-code, you must describe in detail (essay):
○ how the solution would be created
○ What are the elements of the model (data, algorithm, etc)
○ Description of the Classical AI techniques being applied
○ How the Classical AI technique operates in this solution
○ How the solution would operate
● Valid solutions must include one or more of these Classical AI techniques:
○ Searching
○ Planning
Page 3:
○ Logic Programming
○ Bayesian Networks
○ Intelligent Agent
About the ‘Baseline Expectation’
In general, we are expecting the following elements from your deliverables.
Note: some projects in the ‘REPO of Project Ideas’ will include notes for special requirements for the deliverables.
The Solution Report (PDF) must provide:
● Problem scenario
● Link to Google Collab
● Self-assessment
● Copy&Paste of Key Code
Google Colab with:
● Demonstrate how to implement world representation, states, and actons
● Outline (and eventually code) one search algorithm, Bayesian network, Logic Program, other.
● When applicable, consider possible heuristics (e.g., straight-line distance, estimated walking time)
● Advanced: provide comparison of results with different path cost, world configurations, etc
Grading Criteria
Criterion Expectation Weight
1. Originality and Research The project demonstrates a clear, well-motivated, and original 30%
Relevance research question that reflects creative thinking and genuine
curiosity.
2. Methodological Design and The paper presents a coherent, technically sound, and feasible 20%
Technical Soundness analytical design that aligns with the research question. The
construction is methodologically consistent and well-reasoned.
3. Quality of Communication The clarity, organization, and professionalism of the written report 20%
and presentation.
Page 4:
Criterion Expectation Weight
4. Analytical Depth and Quality The project demonstrates substantive analytical effort and produces 30%
of Deliverables high-quality, interpretable outputs that meaningfully address the
request.